
One day in 2008, when she was in her early 20s, Jaimie Krems stumbled across Gchat messages between one of her closest friends and her housemate. They’d been written on her own computer, which her housemate had borrowed, and it turned out the two had been talking all about her.

It wasn’t good.

“I was just really devastated,” Krems recalled. “And since then, I wanted to understand.”

What could cause two friends to act in such a painful way to a third? The experience spurred Krems to pursue a career studying adult friendship, a field she laments as hugely neglected in terms of both attention and funding, passed over in favor of a focus on romance or, conversely, dynamics that lead to stereotyping and discrimination.

“Understandable,” Krems said of the latter, “because it’s horrible and affects a lot of people.” But, she added, “I would argue that friendship affects even more people.”

Krems cited an analysis from researcher Dr. Julianne Holt-Lunstad that found that lacking social connection affects health similarly to smoking up to 15 cigarettes a day.

And we’re increasingly feeling bad at it, she pointed out, citing Google search trends: The query “how to make friends” reached an all-time high last spring and vastly outpaces searches for how to find a date or fall in love. An epidemic of loneliness, a feeling experienced by more than half of US adults, prompted a US Surgeon General’s Advisory in 2023.

But there are things we can do about it, research from Krems and others has found.

“Even though friendship feels like magic, it does involve these teachable competencies,” said Krems, who’s now director of the UCLA Center for Friendship Research. “If we were able to teach that, I think that we’d solve this epidemic of loneliness, which is a health problem, a public health problem, a civic problem. It’s an economic problem, and everybody’s unhappy.”

The recipe for making friends
There are two main “ingredients for friendships to form,” Krems said, citing research from Dr. Daniel Hruschka at Arizona State University, among others: “frequent interaction and mutual attraction.”

Being in the same place with the same people repeatedly, even if it’s as simple as writing in a journal in a coffee shop at the same time each week, is enough of a start. And it’s the part of the equation that’s easier for us to control, Krems pointed out.

“If you could do frequent interaction, maybe there will be somebody with some mutual attraction,” Krems said. “You need both of these things to create a friendship.”

One way to maximize your chances of success on both those fronts is to identify what Dartmouth researcher Dr. Janice McCabe calls “friendship markets” – essentially, “places where many people are open to making friends,” she told CNN.

It’s particularly helpful to think about aspects of your own identity in considering friendship markets, including ones you might not expect, said McCabe, a professor of sociology who studies how and why people connect.

“So if there is a new identity that you’re looking to explore, look for places where people are meeting regularly and have a chance to get to know each other,” McCabe said, particularly ones with built-in times to interact, such as a running club where you can chat along the way, or improv or art classes.

Expat communities, she added, are an example of “great friendship markets.” Often, people living in another country might hope to make friends with locals, but they can also find strong ties among others living the same experience as “foreigners,” even with different countries of origin.

“To me, the lesson here is to notice when you’ve moved into a new identity, even if it wasn’t intended, and seek out others who share that new identity as they may also be open to connecting on that identity that they also find themselves in,” McCabe said.

